+++
title = "Personal Statement"
author = ["Ryan Cummings"]
lastmod = 2020-02-20T17:13:13-05:00
tags = ["residency"]
categories = ["academic"]
draft = true
+++

I found my patient lying restlessly in bed as the sun was rising. Admitted in the late afternoon for vague chest pain and syncope, her last 12 hours were a roller coaster. We first ruled out a heart attack, but my patient's relief was followed by terror when we told her about a large mass our radiologist saw on her chest CT. A biopsy would shortly be arranged. "What do you think this thing in my chest is?", she asked me. Having just started my first medicine rotation, I didn't know what to say. Then, during our morning rounds, the overnight radiologist came to our floor. With some urgency, she walked us through the subtle radiographic signs suggesting that the mass, which she originally thought was a soft-tissue tumor, could really be a hematoma surrounding a ruptured thoracic aortic aneurysm. The stakes were high: if the mass were a hematoma, biopsy could be disastrous, and without treatment the patient could deteriorate rapidly. A consensus was reached, and the patient was prepped for surgery.

I hope to be an advocate for my patients just as that overnight radiologist was for hers, and am excited to be applying for diagnostic radiology. My personal exposure to radiology began early in my life, with x-rays for numerous sprains, dislocations, and even a broken femur. Like many premedical and injury-prone student-athletes, I was originally interested in orthopedics. I even spent a year as a clinical research assistant at Hospital for Special Surgery and a summer in orthopedics at Lenox Hill Hospital to gain experience and generate publications in the field. But reflecting on these experiences, I realized that I am not excited about metal hips and knees. What really excites me is developing an understanding of the complex anatomy and physiology of the diseases affecting my patients. No field offers more exposure to the diagnosis of diverse and fascinating diseases than diagnostic radiology.

Diagnostic radiology suits me perfectly. The pace of work is ideal — brisk with the skilled application of well-trained pattern-recognition, but allowing for slow and analytical thinking when challenges arise. I love interacting with other doctors, who engage in fascinating medical discussions that keep me energized. My work in academic philosophy is, surprisingly enough, excellent practice for the precision of language that radiologists use every day to communicate effectively. Radiologists are often excellent teachers, and I flourish when given the opportunity to teach to my team and my peers. And lastly, I am inspired by how radiologists have the unique ability to direct patient care at critical moments. Radiologists called upon to differentiate between a mediastinal tumor and a hematoma can, in only a few words, radically change a patient's life for the better. To me, this is a very exciting prospect.

As a lifelong technophile, I am also excited to work in a field driven briskly forward by technology. I have been programming computers for more than 15 years, honing skills in fields as diverse as web development and machine learning. I recently designed and programmed a new surgical skills teaching tool, and my home server is slowly training a neural network to identify pneumonia on chest x-rays. As machine learning becomes more integrated with diagnostic radiology, a technical understanding of the operation, advantages, and limitations of deep machine learning may become as important to radiologists as an understanding of physics. With a firm background in computing, I am eager to contribute to the application of machine learning to diagnostic radiology.

I was a third-year medical student when I saw the difference a radiologist can make in a patient's life. On a radiologist's call, our patient with chest pain and syncope lived to have a successful aortic aneurysm repair. While I am passionate about radiology for more reasons than I can possibly list, I am most excited to be a part of those key moments when a radiologist can make a difference.
